know one of the things that I did when I
was doing marital counseling for my
clients was if they were dissatisfied
with their with their spouse let's say
said well what are you fantasized about
in relationship to a new relationship
right what what fantasies spontaneously
enter the theater of your imagination
and they they would tell me you know in
as much detail as was necessary and I
would say well why is it impossible for
you to seek that within the confines of
this relationship you know it might be
well she's not like that or he's not
like that or she would never do that or
he would never act that way it's like
well people are pretty damn strange and
there's a lot of mystery in them and if
if you're a dancer you can get a lot
of
interesting possibility out of people
where you thought there was only a
stultified actuality one of the things I
noticed as a therapist and as an
interviewer you know if my clinical
session got
boring it was because I wasn't paying
enough attention I was substituting my
presumption for the person and so if I
have attended more deeply they would
start revealing more of themsel and then
they'd become like and this was even
true for so-called simp there's no
simple people but I had lots of clients
who were they weren't intellectually
gifted put it that way you know they
were people who would have been
struggling you know often they didn't
have a high school education some of
them weren't even literate but if you
got
them out of the box that maybe you
wanted to put them in they were just as
unbearably interesting as anyone
else and that's there's a norwgian
writer fiction writer called Axel
Sandu who who wrote in one of his books
that that man which does not who does
not understand that any woman contains
every woman in right right he's an idiot
I mean the the way you approach your
spouse is is understanding she is every
woman in this universe and that that
could be uh someone you don't like or
someone you like all aspects of being a
a human being is present in that other
human being and the same of course goes
for me as a man in that same
relationship that I'm the best of men
and I'm the worst of men y y y y and and
the one of the reasons that it's it's
it's a it's a good thing to to stick to
your relationship to to be faithful to
your relationship is then you allow this
multitude of possible persons to be
there the moment you start thinking oh I
would like rather to go over here over
there or I would like to change things
in that that way and have have another
object of my love then you reduce that
person and you don't see the the depth
the the richness inside inside that
other person and I think that's what a
strong and good relationship is about
that is what love and openness is about
is to allow the other person to be fully
Rich fully full
wonder my wife just about died a couple
of years ago and and so did I at about
time time like like it was a narrow was
a narrow path pathway you know and I had
a pretty good relationship with her
before that very good I would say I've
known her since she was like 8 years old
so we've known each other mostly our
whole life you know and she changed
quite a bit after she was ill and really
for the better once she started to
recover and I was much more I would say
grateful to have her around I mean not
that that wasn't there to begin with it
was already there I loved my wife but
the the like the
demonstrative like a true demonstration
of the possibility of her absence woke
me up a bit more and one of the things
that's happened is that now when I see
her I can see her at every stage of her
life at the same time it's really
something and also what's happened like
she shed a lot of herself self imposed
constraints in the aftermath of her
brush with mortality it lasted like nine
months it was very torturous experience
so she changed a lot it's taken multiple
years for the full manifestation of that
change and it still hasn't happened but
it's a wonderful thing to see her and
maybe it's also reflection of my change
in Attitude like she's taken off a lot
of self-imposed constraints I think
we're afraid of our own entropy and know
our own possibility and in doing that I
would say she's become more like a child
again you know and and there's there's
insistence in that in Wordsworth for
example also biblical insistence you
know that unless you become as little
child you can't enter the kingdom of
heaven and it has something to do with
that imaginative plurality that you
described right because one of the
things that's magical about children is
their capacity to magically transform
and to enchant the world and they do
that because they're going in many
directions they're not narrowed and you
know that makes them in need of
discipline and civilization but there's
something wonderful about that so I'd
like you comment on that but I'd also
like to ask you you know what you just
said about relationships that's not
something that everybody knows so I'd
like to know how you figured that
out hard hard work
uh how did I figured that out yeah that
well and you can say it not only did you
figure it out but you can articulate it
and so yeah
um that's a good question I don't know
the answer to it actually uh uh but I I
I I think that it's um it's I've always
had a tendency to be very monogamous is
that what how you say the word in
English yeah yeah and faithful to but in
in the modern world I mean you you're
serly
monoc you have you you have have more
than one relationship but one after the
other as a young person you have several
girlfriends
but you're faithful to each of them all
the time is is that understandable
absolutely yeah and and so I I and that
was unusual in the circles I live were
living in in the 70s that people were
sort of all over the place all of them
and I was like sort of I had this
Instinct for monogamy and I was sort of
wondering why is that so and I realized
that it it it was because it made me uh
discover and and explore the richness of
the other person instead of just
comparing uh to someone else and and
wanting to change someone else and then
of course I've been cultivating that
emotion and that way of living for for
quite some decades now and and it it I
think it's very obvious that that the
moment you
start comparing people
yeah that's a
commodification yeah and you see the
label this guy I'm talking to has these
opinions and this track record and so on
and and and you you you confuse the
person for for the label yeah and all
you see is the labeling H and and life
becomes very boring and of course what
I've been doing with food and
agriculture what I've been doing with
how we how how our cognition system
works what Consciousness is all about
out uh I've been doing a lot of work
also with environmental issues and so on
it it's the same basic story all the
time that we confuse uh sort of the the
label for the real thing we confuse the
terrain for the map yeah the concept for
the real stuff and and I think that what
we do when we are not sort of faithful
in our love relationship is that we
uh we do comparisons all the time
instead of saying okay this is it I'm
not a perfect man in any sense but all
aspects of masculinity and many aspects
of femininity is in me yep and and and
and that's every person is a universe
right right well this is certainly
something that I learned in this is why
I love doing
Psychotherapy because the the art of
Psychotherapy is to have that
realization making itself manifest
constantly during the conversation right
because that and that means the person
is on the cusp of optimized
transformation
[Music]